I normally enjoy air travel there are
only a few things about it that I don't
care for and if you manage to forget
about having to spend hours stuffed into
a cramped seat with some kid kicking
your seat back my only remaining issue
is how low the temperatures in the
passenger cabin usually are so is there
an aeronautical reason for this
suffering at first I thought that by
setting such freezing temperatures
inside the plane airline companies were
just trying to help passengers
acclamations after all the weather might
be way colder in the place they're
heading to well I was wrong despite how
ridiculous it may sound chilly winds are
blowing through the passenger cabin to
provide you with maximum comfort wait
what first the temperature in the cabin
isn't as cold as it may seem
it's normally kept between 71 and 75
degrees and rarely drops lower than 64
degrees in fact that's the average
temperature in most office buildings so
what's the problem don't forget that
while traveling by plane you don't get
up from your seat and move around very
often as a result your body doesn't
produce enough heat to warm itself and
you feel colder than you would under
different circumstances on the other
hand if the cabin is fully occupied the
passengers themselves give off enough
heat to significantly warm the cabin
anyway it turns out that there's a
connection between the pressure and
temperature in the passenger cabin and
people fainting mid flight first and
foremost
passengers tend to lose consciousness in
the air more easily than on the ground
due to a special condition called
hypoxia it occurs when the body's
tissues including the brain don't get
enough oxygen and can't work properly
but if the temperature onboard the plane
is too warm and the pressure is higher
than normal
these factors can worsen and increase
the probability of a negative reaction
of course in different people body
temperatures vary and the temperature
that's comfortable for one person may
seem too hot or too cold for another
but just to be on the safe side airline
carriers prefer to keep temperatures in
the passenger cabin a bit lower than
normal and if you put it this way
I'd rather wear several additional
layers of clothing then allow that poor
guy next to me to black out however
you're not as likely to be shivering
throughout the flight if the plane
you've taken is new the thing is that
newer aircraft have more advanced
thermostats which can regulate cabin
temperature more precisely and even
though it's impossible to adjust the
temperature around individual seats
flight attendants can regulate it by
zones by the way cabin crew members will
usually only raise the temperature after
passengers ask them to because they
usually don't have an issue themselves
with the chilly temperatures after all
flight attendants are constantly working
and moving while the passengers stay in
a relaxed state and that's why their
perception of a comfortable temperature
is very different from yours
and finally have you noticed how hot it
is on the plane before it takes off
especially in contrast to the mid-flight
chill the thing is that the air
conditioning on the ground is always
turned off to save fuel until the plane
leaves the ground as a result the
combined body heat of all the people on
board plus the absence of the air
conditioning can warm the cabin up to an
uncomfortable temperature the maximum
temperature on the plane shouldn't be
more than 90 degrees but luckily you're
unlikely to experience such heat while
flying okay now it's clear that the
passenger cabin is so cool for your own
comfort but what about its dryness is
this gripe unreasonable as well nope
even pilots admit that the average
passenger cabin is incredibly dry and
thus dehydrating it has just 12%
humidity which is way drier than most
deserts
unfortunately airplane manufacturers
can't do much to solve this problem the
dry air is a byproduct of flying at
extremely high altitudes where there's
almost no moisture whatsoever
of course humidifying equipment in the
cabin could partially deal with this
problem but that equipment is pretty
expensive and the results wouldn't be
worth the money
what's more the increase in moisture
levels on board could cause the guts of
the airplane to corrode by the way
what's the most comfortable temperature
for you on board the airplane and how do
you deal with the chill in the passenger
cabin let me know down in the comments
anyway now the temperature inside the
plane makes sense to me but what about
the cargo hold of the airplane where
your dear pets travel what are the
conditions in there many people are
surprised to know that the hold is
pressurized just like the passenger
cabin on top of that to air condition
the cargo hole they use the same air as
the cabin however since this air is
directed from somewhere else it ends up
a bit cooler when it reaches the cargo
hold which is also less insulated than
the passenger cabin
that's why cargo hold temperatures
although varying depending on the plane
type normally don't get higher than 45
degrees is that too cold for the animals
that are transported in the cargo hold
no need to worry the bulk area where
they're kept is heated up to 64 degrees
and finally if a plane is transporting
goods that are sensitive to temperature
there are special cargo bins with
temperature controls inside hmm but if
the temperature inside the cargo hold
isn't that freezing and the air is
pressurized
why do stowaways rarely survive this
experience the problem is that these
people don't hide in the cabin or hold
but in the wheel arches and those are
fully exposed to the elements and as you
know the higher a plane climbs the
colder it gets if the temperature before
takeoff is about 70 degrees Fahrenheit
then at the altitude of 35,000 to 40,000
feet which is the usual cruising
altitude it can drop to minus 70 degrees
Fahrenheit very few people are prepared
enough to hold out in such low
temperatures even for an hour
by the way do you know why airplanes
leave white trails also called contrails
in the sky to tell you the truth I've
always thought it was some sort of a
mission just like those produced by old
cars but it turns out the contrail
appears for the same reason you can see
your breath in cold weather the exhaust
from the plane is humid and hot and when
it mixes with the frigid air and low
pressure at cruising altitude the water
vapor not only condenses but can also
freeze this process looks exactly like
streams of white smoke in the sky just
like your breath on a cold day contrails
can vary in their thickness and duration
depending on the humidity and
temperature of the atmosphere as well as
the plane's altitude and that's
convenient
because you can look at a plane's
contrail and predict the weather keep in
mind that if a white trail left after a
plane is thin and short-lived it means
that up there the humidity is low
therefore the weather is most likely
going to be clear but once you see a
thick and long-lasting contrail prepare
for a storm such a trail indicates high
air humidity from time to time you might
notice previously straight and strong
contrails become wavy or even leave
bizarre rings floating in the sky it
means that up there the plane is either
experiencing turbulence or flying
through air with different density and
temperature another surprising
phenomenon you've probably witnessed is
two planes flying nearby but with one of
them leaving behind a thick long trail
and the other an almost invisible one
the reason may lie in the fact that
different planes have different engines
for example if a plane has a newer
engine its exhaust might have a lower
temperature so the contrail will differ
dramatically from the one left by a
plane with an old engine besides the
length and thickness of the trail
depends on a plane's power settings and
cruising altitude in this latter case
you might think that the two planes are
flying side-by-side but in fact that's
just a visual effect and they're in
different layers of the atmosphere
and since one layer can be way more
humid than the other the planes leave
different trails so I'm done now and
it's time to hit the trail hey if you
learn something new today then give the
video a like and share it with a friend
and here are some other videos I think
you'll enjoy just click on the left or
the right one and remember stay on the
bright side of life